# About the Deeni Project
Hi! I'm Erin Grace. I'm Chetco and Tututni, member tribes of the Confederated Tribes of Siletz. _Deeni_ is the language of Native people of the Southern Oregon and Northern California coasts. I run the Deeni Project and, to this point, have written all the resources in the repo.

I began studying Deeni in 2017. During that time, I found it difficult to learn on my own. Although there are several resources, many are focused on grammar or vocabulary rather than usage. Although some efforts have been made to address this gap, particularly by the [Siletz Tribal Language Project](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCqItaFC4sUC_8fELAa5D9-w), the resources are generally not designed to systematically explain the structure of the language or allow learners to build on their existing knowledge. I hope to fill that gap with the Deeni Project.

# A Note on Sharing Resources Outside the Community
One important point of consideration in the development of the Deeni Project was the question of whether to open the resource to non-Native and non-tribal learners. The only reason our people need this resource at all is because of the genocide of our people, including cultural genocide targeted at our customs, religion, and language. This genocide played out against every tribe in the Americas to some extent, some succumbing to total annihilation. Not surprisingly, many Native people are hesitant to provide non-Native with access to cultural assets, even if it comes in exchange for easier consumption by our own people. However, I've come to realize that although ceremony, ritual, and religion can survive while shrouded in mystery and protected by only a few indivudals, languages die in that environment. To survive, they need the open air and freedom of movement, the ability riff and remix. For this reason, and following in the steps of others who have shared our language in public forums, I've created the cirriculum in open source where anyone can see or access it.
